32 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
is placed in the input layer is produced in the output layer if passed through a
simple image detection CNN network.
The biggest challenge and limitation of DL is to acquire large amount of data and
label it accurately to help the machine while learning the data. Another challengethat could arise is the degree of interpretability which should be high and accurate.
3 Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Modern World
Artiﬁcial intelligence has been evolved as one of the most important technology in
this world, with its impact on almost every ﬁeld of human endeavor. It was all started
in the year 1950s, after its invention by John McCarthy (the father of AI). With time,
it has played a signiﬁcant role in helping the human generation to become moreadvanced and equipped than ever before. It can be mentioned that it has spread the
broad spectrum of its application from “the soil to the space”. The 24 ×7 Internet
facility, the invention of cloud technology, the concept of big data, sensors, and other
technological advancements have turned up as a boon for the development of AI.
Although AI has not yet replaced humans completely, it has assisted humans to a
great extend in solving and handling the problems which are difﬁcult and risky. Inthe form of intelligent machines, it has played the role of representative of human
beings. Today, AI has found wide applications in agriculture, business, education,
entertainment industry, medical, defense, and space technology where it has crucialand admirable effects. It has a great impact in the health sector which has helped
to bridge the gap between technology and medicine, in diagnosing the patients. It
requires data accuracy and security and the trust of the patients on the system. It hasalso many amazing applications of robotics in the form of robots performing surgery
or assisting in diagnosis. Basically, AI deals with large amount of data to obtain the
required results, and accordingly the algorithms are designed to reduce the chances
of error and provide accurate results. As already mentioned, the spectrum of its
application has spread from soil to space as a booming technology for the bettermentand development of human life. Following are few of the application areas of AI and
data based on some case studies.
3.1 Agriculture
The agriculture is the backbone of any country and hence improving this sector with
the help of technology is essential. Considering the world scenario, the agriculturesector shall be capable of producing almost 50% more food than being produced now.
The implementation of AI and its technologies has signiﬁcantly played its role in
improving the situation of agriculture industry. Going with the phases of farming, AIis used in the analysis of soil and its monitoring, advancement in crop sowing phase,