Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 29
2.2 Challenges and limitation of ML
The basic challenge and limitation for ML are that it requires huge amount of data.
Without quality data, ML algorithm cannot provide accurate results for further anal-ysis. The prediction can be considered best if the analysis is done over a large amount
of data. Another point is that the data need to be heterogeneous as well. With wide
range of inputs or datasets, the efﬁciency of the algorithm will be enhanced withappropriate output. It is similar to that of a new entrant in an organization making
mistakes as junior and eventually improves by self-learning and provides output with
required accuracy and efﬁciency.
2.3 Deep Learning
Deep Learning (DL) is considered as the subdomain of ML and thereby the subset
of AI. In ML, the system is provided with given input data sets and subjected to
self-learning from the past experiences and give predictions as output. Deep learningcan be denoted as the next level of machine learning where the system is similar to
human nervous system and mimic the working of the neurons. In ML the system is
mostly put either in supervised or unsupervised learning method with multilayers ofalgorithms undergoing such learning methods. As the number of layers increases, it
is called as deep learning or Deep Neural Network (DNN) [ 8]. The initial layer is
denoted as the input layer, the last layer is called the output layer and the intermediate
layers are termed as the hidden layer, where all the layers are interconnected [ 9]. The
amount of the depth of the network in terms of layers decides how efﬁcient thealgorithm can do the dense representation of any data (for example, in an image, theedge, boundaries, etc., are the required data needed for representation). This method
has the capability of working upon unstructured data and provides efﬁcient results.
This includes intake of large amount of data known as bigdata and assures better
performance with respect to the complex data [ 10]. It helps in enhanced feature
extraction, pattern recognition of complex dataset and high-level data extraction.
The main advantage is that it can learn without any predeﬁned data and does not
require explicit programming by the programmers. The process of deep learning
begins with the understanding the problem given, identifying the data, selecting theproper algorithm followed by training and testing the model.
2.3.1 Types of Neural Networks
Basically neural networks can be classiﬁed into two categories, namely,
I. Shallow neural network (in which there is only one single hidden layer
between the input and output layer) as shown in Fig. 3a[11].
