36 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
with help of AI and ML. It is being identiﬁed that BlueDot and Metabiota
uses AI and ML to predict the pandemic outbreak.
(iii) Quick diagnosis : it is true that AI alone cannot treat patients but has assisted
a lot for the quick diagnosis in terms of image analysis of the lungs (CT scan)
of suspected and positive cases.
(iv) Tracking the patients : it is the most prevalent job that is being done to keep
the record of the active, recovered, and death cases. Microsoft developed aCorona online tracker to track the status of the virus and its possible predictions
based on the present data. Similarly, the Indian government also developedits own website to track Corona infected persons. The very famous Aarogya
Setu App developed by the Ministry of Telecommunication and Information
Technology, Government of India, helped to guide citizens in tracking thenearby affected patients and to take necessary preventive measures. AI has
helped to ﬁght back the pandemic from this deadly virus.
3.6 Smart Cities and Transportation
This is the area in which the application of AI has its speciﬁc and unique role. Smart
city is a term, which has become a point of measure of urbanization of a nation.A smart city can be described as the city with technologies to make the life of
people much easier and advanced. Similarly, smart transportation signiﬁes the way
of handling the transportation and controlling the trafﬁc and accidents which is reallya matter of concern due to large number of deaths on highways and roads [ 18]. As
people in smart cities are more likely to use smart technologies, it is obvious thatthe data security will become a major concern. Be it smart homes, parks, roboticequipped restaurants, or the home delivery of food, it is all because of AI. They also
play a crucial role in crowd management and cybersecurity in smart cities.
Considering smart mobility and transportation, AI has given autonomous vehicles
the power to detect the chances of accidents and protect the person. It may be the
automated airbags or the water splashes to the alarming sounds if the driver gets tosleep while driving. The broader applications of intelligent transportation systems
are the use of CCTV cameras installed in the highways to keep track and record
of all the activities. Google map needs no extra explanation how it is helping intracking the one who is traveling and tracing the places one needs to travel. It also
helps in suggesting different routes to control the congestion. Based on a study it
was found that almost more than 500 train accidents occurred from 2012 to 2017 inIndia, out of which 53% was due to the derailment. So, the Ministry of Railways,
India used AI technology to help in detecting the problems in the track and avoided
many such accidents. These technologies are being used and will be used further forthe betterment of the nation and the world.
