See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/351758474
Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Chapt er · May 2021
DOI: 10.1007/978-981-16-0415-7_2
CITATIONS
14READS
58,685
2 author s:
Moumit a Ghosh
National Instit ute of T echnolog y Rourk ela
4 PUBLICA TIONS    18 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Thirugnanam Arunachalam
National Instit ute of T echnolog y Rourk ela
74 PUBLICA TIONS    1,029  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Moumit a Ghosh  on 10 Mar ch 2023.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Moumita Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
Abstract Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is the branch of computer science, which makes
the computers to mimic the human behavior to assist humans for better perfor-
mance in the ﬁeld of science and technology. Replicating human intelligence, solving
knowledge-intensive tasks, building machines, which can perform tasks, that require
human intelligence, creating some system which can learn by itself are the few
speciﬁc goals of AI. Machine learning and deep learning are two subsets of AI which
are used to solve problems using high performance algorithms and multilayer neuralnetworks, respectively. With the help of machine learning process, structured data
like genetic data, electrophysical data, and imaging data are properly investigated
in medical diagnosis. AI provides advanced devices, advanced drug designing tech-niques, tele-treatment, physician–patient communication using Chatbots and intel-
ligent machines used for analyzing the cause and the chances of occurrence of any
disease in the ﬁeld of health care.
Keywords Artiﬁcial intelligence
·Machine learning ·Deep learning ·Drug
development ·Healthcare systems
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is a domain of computer science which deals with the
development of intelligent computer systems, which are capable to perceive, analyze,
and react accordingly to the inputs [ 1,2]. It is well-known fact that humans are consid-
ered as the most intelligent and smart species on earth. The features which have helped
them to bag this title include the ability to think, apply logic, do reasoning, under-
stand the complexity, and make decisions on their own. They can also do planning,innovation, and solve problems to a greater extent. Since the era of invention of ﬁre to
reaching the Mars, man has invented many things for the beneﬁt of humans. One such
M. Ghosh ·A. Thirugnanam ( B)
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering, National Institute of Technology
Rourkela, Rourkela 769008, Odisha, Indiae-mail: thirugnanam.a@nitrkl.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021K. G. Srinivasa et al. (eds.), Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Information
Management: A Healthcare Perspective , Studies in Big Data 88,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0415-7_223

24 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
invention is the computer, which plays a signiﬁcant role in reducing the workload of
humans and solving many complex mathematical and logical problems. However,
for researchers, it can be considered that sky is not the limit for new inventions. So,they tried to create a “man-made homosapien” species, which can be related to the
world of computers in the form of AI (which are Artiﬁcial, i.e., manmade, and Intel-
ligence, i.e., has thinking power). If a system can have the basic skills like learning,
reasoning, self-improvement (by learning from experience), language understanding,and solving problems, then it can be assumed that there is the existence of AI. The AI
has been used and implemented in many ﬁelds especially in technological domainand is expected to provide 2.3 million jobs by 2020. It is a cutting-edge technology
which has its impact in almost every ﬁeld, be it business, defense, aerospace, or health
care systems. It can also be denoted as the method of simulation of human intelli-gence designed or programmed by humans. With the help of AI, a well-equipped
life is generated where the automated machines work for humans, saving their time
and energy. Basically, two types of assistants are considered for humans, manual(in the form of robots), and digital (Chatbots) which can perform risky, repetitive,
and troublesome tasks. The task of developing such machines is accomplished by
minutely studying the human behavior and implementing the logic in the form of
algorithms resulting in inventions of software, devices, robots, etc., making human
race smarter.
There are many areas which contribute to artiﬁcial intelligence which includes
mathematics (used for developing algorithms), biology, philosophy, psychology,neuroscience (for studying human mind and its behavior), statistics (for handlinghuge data), and last but not the least, computer science (to run the algorithm for
implementing the concepts). The basic aim of AI is to provide more transparent,
interpretable, and explainable systems which can help to establish a better-equippedsystem used as an intelligent agent. The concept of trusting machine as a replica of
human started with the invent of turing test in which the machine is tested irrespective
of the knowledge of examiner upon the instructions given considering it as humanand if it passes the test, the machine is considered as intelligent. No wonder AI has
affected many aspects of the society and presented a new modern era in this digital
revolution.
1.1 Types of AI (Based on Capabilities)
The various types of artiﬁcial intelligence based on the capabilities can be classiﬁed
as
– Weak or narrow AI
– General AI
– Strong AI.
Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 25
W eak or narrow AI : it is a type of AI which can perform a predeﬁned narrow set of
instructions without exhibiting any thinking capability. It is the most widely used type
of AI in this world. Some famous examples are Apples’s Siri, Alexa, Alpha Go, IBM’sWatson supercomputer, Sophia (the humanoid) all belong to the weak AI type [ 3].
General AI : it is the type of AI which can perform the tasks like what human can
do. Till now it is not achieved, there are no such machines which works like humanor can think as perfectly as human, but it may happen in near future.
Strong AI : it is the type of AI in which it is expected that the machine will surpass
the capacity of human. It will perform better than humans, though it is tough, but it
is not impossible. It may be the situation when it can be said that the machines will
be the master and overtake humans. It has been considered as a great threat to thesociety by scientists including Stephen Hawking.
1.2 Types of AI (Based on Functionality)
Based on the functionality, artiﬁcial intelligence can be classiﬁed as per the followingtypes:
(i) Reactive machines
(ii) Limited memory
(iii) Theory of mind
(iv) Self-awareness.
Reactive machines : these are the machines which works on the data available in the
form of predeﬁned dataset. It does not have the facility of data storage for storing
the past and future data. It completely depends on the present data. IBM’s chess
program which defeated famous champion Garry Kasparov and the deep blue system,
Google’s AlphaGo are some of the examples for reactive machines [ 3].
Limited memory : these are the machines which can store the past experience or
store the memory for limited period of time. An example for limited memory AI isthe self-driving cars (it can store the information like speed, distance, speed limit
required for the navigation of the car).
Theory of mind : these are types of machines, which are expected to understand the
psychological and emotional aspects of human mind and work accordingly. So far
such machines are a dream but scientists are working to develop such machines in
near future.
Self-awareness : these machines belong to a hypothetical concept that will be consid-
ered as super-intelligent machines, which can think, act, and will be self-aware as
they will have consciousness and sentiments like humans. Research is carried out todevelop such machines and considered as future AI.

26 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
1.3 Domains of AI
The major domains of AI (Fig. 1) are neural network, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy
logic systems, natural language processing (NLP).
Neural networks : these can be described as the representation of human neural
system, i.e., neurons and dendrites in the form of layers and nodes representing data.
It comprises algorithms that understand the relationships between the data while
mimicking the human brain. These are widely used in AI in the form of machine
learning and deep learning. Some of the typical examples are pattern recognition offace and image recognition in medical diagnosis.
Robotics : it is the domain of AI which is mostly associated with the development of
intelligent machines in the form of robot which obeys human instructions. The use of
robots or humanoids is a new trend and is being appreciated and adopted worldwide.
Robots used in industry, medical surgery, restaurants, etc., are classiﬁed under thiscategory.
Expert system : these are systems which make decisions with the help of data present
in the knowledge base and getting guidance by an expert. These are basically
computer applications developed to solve complex problems with intelligence and
expertise.
Fuzzy logic system : this domain is considered as resembling the human thinking
method and decision-making. It is quite similar to the way humans decide between 0
and 1, but it also deals with all the possibilities between 0 and 1. Examples of fuzzylogic systems used are in consumer electronics, automobiles, comparison of data,
etc.
Neural network 
NLP Fuzzy logicRobotics Expert system
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Fig. 1 V arious domains of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 27
Natural language processing (NLP) : this domain deals with bridging the gap of
communication between the computer and human languages. It is basically the inter-
action between computer and human in a smart way. Google translator and spell checkare some of the examples under NLP domain.
2 Subsets of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Artiﬁcial intelligence has emerged as a boon for the society for the furtherance of
advanced techniques to deal with the real-life problems. The major two subsets of
AI are Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL). ML is considered as thesubset of AI and DL is considered as the subset of ML. The pictorial representation
of the relationship between AI, ML, and DL is shown in Fig. 2.
2.1 Machine Learning
As humans can think, improve by self-improvement cycle, and learn from the past
experiences, AI machines can also learn from the past experiences with the help of
the concept known as Machine Learning (ML). The machine learning deals with the
development of algorithms that enables the computer to learn from its data and pastexperiences on their own [ 4]. In this method, the machine analyzes the available data
set which is also known as training data and with the help of the algorithms predict thepossible output over the given input. More the data (information) is provided, moreperfect is the performance or prediction. In other words, the relationship between
the data and efﬁciency is that the machine can improve its efﬁciency by gaining
Fig. 2 Relationship between
AI, ML, and DL

28 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
more and more data. It can learn from the data and improve automatically. This
is very much helpful for dealing with huge data of complex problems, which are
difﬁcult for humans to deal with and they also consume more time in solving. In thisprocess of computing the machine receives data as input and provides result using
an appropriate algorithm.
Classiﬁcation of Machine Learning
Based on the nature of the learning signal or response that the machine gets; machine
learning can be classiﬁed into following categories:
(i) Supervised learning
(ii) Unsupervised learning
(iii) Reinforcement learning.
Supervised learning : according to the literal meaning, this method correlates with
the method of learning of student under the supervision of a teacher. As a teacher
illustrates the student with many good examples to help in grasping the concept
perfectly, the machine is provided with many labeled data to help in obtaining theperfect output from the given input. The algorithms under this method are classiﬁed
into two categories, i.e., regression and classiﬁcation. One example of this method
is spam ﬁltering [ 5,6].
Unsupervised learning : in this method the machine has to train itself without any
supervisor, i.e., the data provided at the input are not labeled or classiﬁed. Thealgorithm has to train itself by searching the degree of similarities among the given
data and ﬁgure out the appropriate output for the given problem. The algorithm helps
to reﬁne the data which can be correlated with the desired output. The algorithmsare classiﬁed into clustering and association types [ 6,7].
Reinforcement learning : this method is typically a feedback-based learning method.
In this method the machine is given a reward for every right action taken by it and
a penalty for any wrong action, so it is a self-learning method done by analyzing its
past performances. The objective of the algorithm is to achieve maximum rewardpoints. Examples for reinforcement learning is a robotic dog learning by its own
mistakes and performances, computer playing video games by their own.
The machine learning algorithm is widely being used in multiple ﬁelds such as
medical diagnosis, image processing, web search engines, photo tagging applica-tions, ﬁnance and marketing sector, fraud detection, weather forecasting, and many
more. The main advantage is the repetitive process and self-learning methods that itapplies to ﬁnd the output.

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 29
2.2 Challenges and limitation of ML
The basic challenge and limitation for ML are that it requires huge amount of data.
Without quality data, ML algorithm cannot provide accurate results for further anal-ysis. The prediction can be considered best if the analysis is done over a large amount
of data. Another point is that the data need to be heterogeneous as well. With wide
range of inputs or datasets, the efﬁciency of the algorithm will be enhanced withappropriate output. It is similar to that of a new entrant in an organization making
mistakes as junior and eventually improves by self-learning and provides output with
required accuracy and efﬁciency.
2.3 Deep Learning
Deep Learning (DL) is considered as the subdomain of ML and thereby the subset
of AI. In ML, the system is provided with given input data sets and subjected to
self-learning from the past experiences and give predictions as output. Deep learningcan be denoted as the next level of machine learning where the system is similar to
human nervous system and mimic the working of the neurons. In ML the system is
mostly put either in supervised or unsupervised learning method with multilayers ofalgorithms undergoing such learning methods. As the number of layers increases, it
is called as deep learning or Deep Neural Network (DNN) [ 8]. The initial layer is
denoted as the input layer, the last layer is called the output layer and the intermediate
layers are termed as the hidden layer, where all the layers are interconnected [ 9]. The
amount of the depth of the network in terms of layers decides how efﬁcient thealgorithm can do the dense representation of any data (for example, in an image, theedge, boundaries, etc., are the required data needed for representation). This method
has the capability of working upon unstructured data and provides efﬁcient results.
This includes intake of large amount of data known as bigdata and assures better
performance with respect to the complex data [ 10]. It helps in enhanced feature
extraction, pattern recognition of complex dataset and high-level data extraction.
The main advantage is that it can learn without any predeﬁned data and does not
require explicit programming by the programmers. The process of deep learning
begins with the understanding the problem given, identifying the data, selecting theproper algorithm followed by training and testing the model.
2.3.1 Types of Neural Networks
Basically neural networks can be classiﬁed into two categories, namely,
I. Shallow neural network (in which there is only one single hidden layer
between the input and output layer) as shown in Fig. 3a[11].

30 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of asimple and bdeep learning neural network
II. Deep neural network (in which there are multiple hidden layers between the
input and output layer and it is the most widely used network) as shown in
Fig. 3b.
The deep neural networks are further broadly classiﬁed into three categories:
(a) F eed-forward neural networks : it is the single way data transmission type of
network in which the data moves towards the output layer through the inputlayer. It does not contain any recurrent movement of information.
(b) Recurrent neural networks : in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), there is a
recurrent ﬂow of data from the output to the input to generate the memory for

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 31
the system, learn from the data and produce results. Some of the major appli-
cations of the RNN are the Chatbots, fraud detection algorithms in monetary
transaction, providing caption for images, and many more [ 11].
(c) Convolutional neural networks : the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
are the most widely used neural networks which have multi-layered neuralnetwork. The CNN is considered to be the most efﬁcient form of neural networkwhich is basically used for feature extraction of images and pattern recognition.
It has a wide range of application in the ﬁeld of medical diagnosis and has
helped in medical image analysis. Deep CNN has its great usage in radiologyand pathology as well. For instance, it can help in esophageal endoscopy for
detecting esophageal cancer [ 12]. The schematic diagram (Fig. 4) describes
how the image recognized by the network [ 13,14]. The CNN network is widely
used method and algorithm in the application of deep learning and is basicallyused for image identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. The algorithms are developed
in a manner to deal with the pixel data. The basic CNN network consists oftwo parts, i.e., feature extractor and classiﬁer. The feature extractor contains the
convolutional and pooling layers whose purpose is to extract the minute features
from the image in terms of pixel data. The convolutional layer deals with the
feature extraction of the image and preserving the relevant data about the
pixels. It reveals the information like edge, boundaries of a image. The poolinglayers reduce the dimensionality of an image while retaining the important
information. As CNN is a multilayer neuron network, the role classiﬁer part
of the network is to classify the information obtained from convolution andpooling layers. This role is played by the fully connective layer whose motive
is to connect each node of a layer with other nodes. As a result, whatever image
Fig. 4 Schematic diagram depicting the image recognition of the input image using CNN

32 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
is placed in the input layer is produced in the output layer if passed through a
simple image detection CNN network.
The biggest challenge and limitation of DL is to acquire large amount of data and
label it accurately to help the machine while learning the data. Another challengethat could arise is the degree of interpretability which should be high and accurate.
3 Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Modern World
Artiﬁcial intelligence has been evolved as one of the most important technology in
this world, with its impact on almost every ﬁeld of human endeavor. It was all started
in the year 1950s, after its invention by John McCarthy (the father of AI). With time,
it has played a signiﬁcant role in helping the human generation to become moreadvanced and equipped than ever before. It can be mentioned that it has spread the
broad spectrum of its application from “the soil to the space”. The 24 ×7 Internet
facility, the invention of cloud technology, the concept of big data, sensors, and other
technological advancements have turned up as a boon for the development of AI.
Although AI has not yet replaced humans completely, it has assisted humans to a
great extend in solving and handling the problems which are difﬁcult and risky. Inthe form of intelligent machines, it has played the role of representative of human
beings. Today, AI has found wide applications in agriculture, business, education,
entertainment industry, medical, defense, and space technology where it has crucialand admirable effects. It has a great impact in the health sector which has helped
to bridge the gap between technology and medicine, in diagnosing the patients. It
requires data accuracy and security and the trust of the patients on the system. It hasalso many amazing applications of robotics in the form of robots performing surgery
or assisting in diagnosis. Basically, AI deals with large amount of data to obtain the
required results, and accordingly the algorithms are designed to reduce the chances
of error and provide accurate results. As already mentioned, the spectrum of its
application has spread from soil to space as a booming technology for the bettermentand development of human life. Following are few of the application areas of AI and
data based on some case studies.
3.1 Agriculture
The agriculture is the backbone of any country and hence improving this sector with
the help of technology is essential. Considering the world scenario, the agriculturesector shall be capable of producing almost 50% more food than being produced now.
The implementation of AI and its technologies has signiﬁcantly played its role in
improving the situation of agriculture industry. Going with the phases of farming, AIis used in the analysis of soil and its monitoring, advancement in crop sowing phase,
Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 33
moving forward in the pest/weed control methods and lastly to the crop harvesting
and supply of produce to the right place and at justiﬁable rate [ 15,16]. With the
advent of AI, sensor technology and Internet this industry has beneﬁtted to a large
extent. In soil analysis and monitoring, AI can help us to know about the soil and seed
relationship. In this regard, it tells which seed should be opted for speciﬁc type of
soil. It predicts in reducing the use of harmful chemical fertilizers used to enhance theplant growth and monitors the irrigation method thereby saving water. According to
a study done in Alfalfa, California, the use of Geographic Information System (GIS),
in the irrigation method has helped to enhance the crop output by 35% and reductionin the amount of water used for irrigation. AI-based apps, basically with the help of
sensors, pictures, and infrared rays help to determine the quality and properties of
soil. Hence it helps in improving the agriculture process assuring better yield andproﬁt for the concerned farmers.
Moving to the next application is the sowing process enhancement by the use of
AI sowing app. According to a study in 2016, pilot project with 175 farmers wasinitiated by ICRISA T (The International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid
Tropics) with partnership of Microsoft in Kurnool district of Andhra Pradesh, India
whose objective was to increase the level of output (about 30%) with decrease in
the investment done prior to the farming. It was equipped with the alert messages
provided to the farmers regarding the most suitable dates for cropping, land prepara-tion, and usage of fertilizer using this app which works and gives required results by
taking the images uploaded by the farmers from the user end. In another study, the
development of machine learning technology along with integrated computer visionapplications by Blue River Technologies aimed to optimize the herbicide and pest
control. This technology helps to distinguish between the affected and normal parts
of the plant. The “see and spray” project of Arkansas, USA, using this technology,got reduction in the required amount of expenses for weedicides per acre of land.
In a different study done on the crop harvesting, it was found that the time taken by
AI-based robots in tomato farms in Japan, is lesser than the time taken by the human.
3.2 Business, Banking, and Finance
This industry or sector is very important and delicate to protect the data and recordsof millions of customers. The prime factor is the trust, data transparency, and security
of the customers. But unfortunately, till date, AI is unable to stop any fraud cases.
However, with the help of AI many fraud detection methods and technologies are now
offered to make the system more robust. Similarly, the business and retail market are
also getting beneﬁted by improvised methods of customer handling and providingfaster and safer services. The world of e-commerce is highly affected by its high-level
of customer interaction.
In the ﬁnance and banking sector, AI has come up with many technological aids
either in form of apps or methods to prevent from frauds, enhance better customer datastorage/retrieval, and many more. A study by a bank helped online fraud detection

34 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
solution provider, i.e., Teradata which helps to manage the false positive cases and
detection of real frauds. Another study revealed that the payment fraud over anomaly
of data is nicely dealt by a client bank using the software Feedzai, using which thebank got a hike of 78% of new customers. DataVisor software helped a bank in USA
to detect the fraud in loan and repayments and get proﬁt by 30% with a high accuracy
of 90%. Similarly, in business sector, AI has helped many IT ﬁrms like Deloitte, IBM,Infosys to bloom in the market as a better technological service provider. Elsevier
undergone a digital transformation from being a publisher to a tech with the help of
big data and machine learning.
3.3 Education
This is the sector of any nation which transforms the nation after all students are thefuture of the nation. Considering India only where it is assumed that almost more
than half of the population is of age lesser than 25, therefore, it is much more crucial
to protect the data shared by the students and provide the best form of education. In
this pandemic year, it is not unknown how technology has equipped the education
sector to continue the process of education be it in schools, colleges, or research.Apps like Zoom, Microsoft Teams have made it possible or easy to impart knowledge
online and from distance. AI has helped the students worldwide to get access to the
huge amount of data in the forms of syllabus, curriculum, textbooks, research articlesand papers, and e-learning to a greater extent [ 17].
According to Content Technologies Inc., which is an AI research and development
company, smart, and customized educational content can be created and developedwhich help the students to get access of the customized study materials. It basically
uses the concept of deep learning. In a hackathon (organized by NITI Ayog), ReadEx
was featured which helped to generate real-time questions using natural languageprocessing and also provided content recommendations and ﬂashcard creation. In
a recent study, the Andhra Pradesh government (India) was aided by a predictive
analysis done with the assistance of Microsoft using some Azure machine learningprocess to ﬁnd the dropouts of students in an academic institution. It successfully
detected 19,500 students record who are more likely to dropout in Visakhapatnam
district for the year (2018–2019) so that precautionary counseling sessions could bearranged to counsel the students. Not only the students, teachers also got beneﬁtted
from these technologies as it optimized searches in Wikipedia or e-learning courses
from various organizations. A case study depicts the use of Pearson’s Write-To-Learn
app for the betterment of writing skills. This app provides tips, hints, and personalized
feedbacks to improve the writing skills of the learner be it student or any teacher. Inanother study, AI has put the fact of how Wikipedia handled the situation of decreased
level of content writers by 40% and the problem of controlling abusive comments
by the users. It uses AI and associate technology to deal with it and now its AI whowrites for Wikipedia which has really changed the world.

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 35
3.4 Entertainment and Gaming
This industry does not need much introduction and effect of AI in this. The highly efﬁ-
cient digitally strong technologies have provided awesome movies and work pieceswhich includes high power editing, imaging, and sound effects. It has transformed the
media industry. Starting from the camera effects to the action effects everything has
been improved. Probably the superpowers having a huge fan following are nothingusing technology. The famous Netﬂix uses AI and big data to manage the search
and provides the better content recommendation and many more ways to help users
for better access of data. Gaming industry also uses AI to improve the quality of thegame and secure the data provided by the users. It has made the online game in social
media possible with multiple participants. Ludoking, PUBG, and many other games
have touched and captured the hearts of millions of teenagers.
3.5 Health Care
Artiﬁcial intelligence has its maximum effect in this sector and has totally trans-
formed the way of treatment and diagnosis. The goal of having a very effective
healthcare system of a nation can now be achieved in many way by difﬁcult taskaccomplishments with the help of technology and AI. The three basic steps of treat-
ment which are detection, diagnosis and analysis, and treatment are now improvised
and enhanced with the advent of artiﬁcial intelligence in this sector. The main twofactors which are of major concerned are the patient’s data privacy and security. Any
technology which is introduced mainly focus on these two factors. This includes
development of different apps including data collection apps, digital Chatbots forconsultation on primary basis, image detection, and analysis using speciﬁc algo-
rithms. Since the broad discussion has been done later in this chapter here the focus
is on the role of AI in COVID-19 pandemic in India and worldwide.
Role of AI in Handling COVID-19 Pandemic
The role of AI in medical ﬁeld is tremendous as the planet witnessed a pandemic
due to Corona outbreak, which has affected the entire human population with huge
number of death cases. In this scenario, AI has come with its technologies to helpthe people from getting infected with the virus. It cannot assure to avoid death but
can assure prevention and precaution by the following ways:
(i) It has served as high-level data mining tool : with the help of AI, researchers
can get help to ﬁght the disease. Information like the nature of the virus,
the symptoms, crucial data from other research papers, and records of pastincidents are available by data mining methodologies.
(ii) As a predictor : the Corona outbreak was reported in Wuhan, China. The fact
that it turned into a pandemic and all such related information were predicted
36 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
with help of AI and ML. It is being identiﬁed that BlueDot and Metabiota
uses AI and ML to predict the pandemic outbreak.
(iii) Quick diagnosis : it is true that AI alone cannot treat patients but has assisted
a lot for the quick diagnosis in terms of image analysis of the lungs (CT scan)
of suspected and positive cases.
(iv) Tracking the patients : it is the most prevalent job that is being done to keep
the record of the active, recovered, and death cases. Microsoft developed aCorona online tracker to track the status of the virus and its possible predictions
based on the present data. Similarly, the Indian government also developedits own website to track Corona infected persons. The very famous Aarogya
Setu App developed by the Ministry of Telecommunication and Information
Technology, Government of India, helped to guide citizens in tracking thenearby affected patients and to take necessary preventive measures. AI has
helped to ﬁght back the pandemic from this deadly virus.
3.6 Smart Cities and Transportation
This is the area in which the application of AI has its speciﬁc and unique role. Smart
city is a term, which has become a point of measure of urbanization of a nation.A smart city can be described as the city with technologies to make the life of
people much easier and advanced. Similarly, smart transportation signiﬁes the way
of handling the transportation and controlling the trafﬁc and accidents which is reallya matter of concern due to large number of deaths on highways and roads [ 18]. As
people in smart cities are more likely to use smart technologies, it is obvious thatthe data security will become a major concern. Be it smart homes, parks, roboticequipped restaurants, or the home delivery of food, it is all because of AI. They also
play a crucial role in crowd management and cybersecurity in smart cities.
Considering smart mobility and transportation, AI has given autonomous vehicles
the power to detect the chances of accidents and protect the person. It may be the
automated airbags or the water splashes to the alarming sounds if the driver gets tosleep while driving. The broader applications of intelligent transportation systems
are the use of CCTV cameras installed in the highways to keep track and record
of all the activities. Google map needs no extra explanation how it is helping intracking the one who is traveling and tracing the places one needs to travel. It also
helps in suggesting different routes to control the congestion. Based on a study it
was found that almost more than 500 train accidents occurred from 2012 to 2017 inIndia, out of which 53% was due to the derailment. So, the Ministry of Railways,
India used AI technology to help in detecting the problems in the track and avoided
many such accidents. These technologies are being used and will be used further forthe betterment of the nation and the world.

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 37
3.7 Space Exploration
In the present scenario it has become almost impossible to imagine the world without
technology and the effects of AI in space exploration. The world is aware of the spacemission of Chandrayan-2 and the mission to Mars of ISRO which is not possible
without the help of AI and its application. Starting from the satellite communication
to the rovers moving around the Mars surface many activities needs to be performedby its own or without any instruction from the space station. Be it NASA or ISRO
or any other space organization, no one can deny the use of AI in space exploration
and how it has enhanced the quality of space exploration. The satellites sending theimages from space are decoded and extraction of useful information from the images
is done with the help of machine and deep learning. As per a study in 2015, it has been
known that the space mission of SpaceX Falcon 9 was accomplished with the help
of machine learning which helped it for successful landing at the Cape Canaveral
Air Force Station. Application of deep learning has assured the automatic landing ofmany aircrafts, accurate data collection and transmission without minimum chances
of human error.
From another study it was reported that SKICA T (Sky Image Cataloging and
Analysis Tool) performed beyond the expectations of human and was able to classifymany images having lower resolution during the span of second Palomer Sky Survey.
With the help of AI, NASA and Google discovered two obscure planets in 2017[Kepler-90i and Kepler-90 g]. From these studies, it can be assumed how strongly
AI and its subset-based technologies have changed the world in the space exploration
and deﬁnitely, many more to come with the strengths of AI technology in creating aworld of intelligent machines.
4 Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Advanced Medical Diagnosis
Medical ﬁeld is the area where the AI has put its most important impact which haschanged the way of medical diagnosis. It has made the diagnosis process much moreeffective, efﬁcient, faster, and much more reliable. It never aims to replace the doctors
but to help them in making their service easier. It basically acts as an assistant to
the physician. The role of AI in medical diagnosis is classiﬁed into two types, i.e.,virtual and physical. Virtual branch deals with clinical data management and the
physical branch mostly deals with the use of robots [ 19]. It has many applications
such as assisting in diagnosis, in surgery, with the help of speciﬁcally designed robots
and equipment helping in guiding the patients about the particular disease. It also
helps to aware them and restricts them from getting affected with the help of Tele-
treatment technologies. It is also used in signal and image processing along withsome crucial predictions regarding the organs. It has also assisted the physicians
in maintaining their daily schedule by acting as a reminder to them. It also helps
the patients in keeping track with the doctor regarding their pre- and post-surgery

38 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
conditions. The medical data and records maintenance, the payment facility, and
many more applications are used in the healthcare system. Since healthcare system
is one of the most important sectors for any nation, it really needs to be improveda lot to facilitate the people and enhance quality treatment in this sector. All this
has been possible due to the introduction of AI, cloud technology (for data storage
and fast retrieval), the concept of big data, and the use of mobile computing in thehealthcare system. Eventually the combination of AI, Robotics, Internet of Things
(IoT), and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) is the new era of healthcare solution
system and an important milestone in the process of fourth industrial revolution.Following image (Fig. 5) depicts the most important use cases of AI and robotics as
a whole in the healthcare system [ 20].
As per the data from a case study a project named as the project DeepDream which
was developed by Google in 2015 helped to create images of given input and also
imagine all possible features that the image should have. This method includes the
training of the neural network-based software with millions of images as an input andthen asked to produce images from the selected. Based on some case studies on the
combating technologies for the most common deadly disease which is cancer a soft-
ware was introduced by the IBM, namely, Watson for oncology, including both ML
and NLP technologies, in 2016. It helped the patients to get to know about the correct
Fig. 5 Use cases of AI for healthcare system

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 39
mode of treatment required for them based on their symptoms and health conditions.
A similar project for fastening the cancer therapy process is the AI developed by NITI
Ayog organization of Indian government which is named as Digital Pathology whichcontained the images of annotated and curated pathology images. Another ongoing
project is the Biobank for cancer patients which helped to bridge the gap between
the imaging done by radiologists and by the machine and ﬁnd out some very minutedetails. One more case study talks about the e-healthcare and consultation service
provided by the UK-based AI Babylon in 2018. In a case study, it explains how the
nurse robot Molly which helps the physician in organizing the patients’ symptomsand follow up the treatment process. An app developed by National Institutes of
Health named as AI AiCure to manage the patient’s prescriptions and manage the
health condition of patient.
The basic things on which any AI developer put focus are the data generation,
data management, and disease detection and management. There are many exam-ples of medical imaging being improved by the implementation of deep learningalgorithms be it in detecting the correct disease at the right time or throughout the
diagnosis process like eye diseases such as diabetic retinopathy, diabetes detection,
risk prediction and control, and also the heart disease monitoring systems [ 21,22].
There are also many cases where the drug discovery is done with the help of AI,machine learning, and deep learning technologies and help to ﬁnd the best solutionfor a disease. There is no limit to its application under proper implementation and
ideologies. But there are few challenges that AI must face in the ﬁeld of medicine
and health care such as the data accuracy, security, integrity, and the interpretability.These factors are very much important for any technology to be trusted and used by
the general public. Another factors includes the rate of availability of the services
to the people in need at correct time which aims at the digitizing the nation totallybecause it is known that the rural areas lack the facilities and also the doctors move
to town and cities for their improvement. So, the rural remains the same in most of
the cases, thereby the prime job is to provide the service where it is much needed.Still, with all these challenges AI has been working with much accuracy in health
care and not only diagnosis or treatment it has gone beyond that and provided with
some advanced level of medical applications which are being discussed later in thischapter.
4.1 Database Management
In healthcare system, the application of AI, ML, DL, cloud computing, and IoMThas created excellent technologies for the development and services to the healthcaresystem. Currently, the whole world is going digitized at a higher rate and is in the grip
of technology assisted services. With the help of technologies, such as cloud storage
and devices based on mobile computing methods, the digital universe is existing andworking efﬁciently. It provides lots of data to store, keep track of and retrieve at a
higher speed. Based on a report by the International Data Corporation (IDC), the

40 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
data size of this digitized universe will be almost 40,000 Exabytes (EB) by the end
of 2020. Similarly, by the use of AI and relevant technologies in healthcare system, it
is generating large amounts of data in the form of EHR (Electronic Health Record),EMR (Electronic Medical Record), PHR (Personal Health Record), MPM (Medical
Practice Management software), and other digital records related to the patients and
physicians. The biggest challenge is to manage, maintain the privacy and securitynorms of all these data. In such cases, an advanced level of algorithms by AI and ML
are required to handle big data efﬁciently ensuring no loss of security and integrity
of the data. For instance, the AI and ML approaches have been used to ﬁnd usefulinformation from the “data lakes” which are large data sets of information extracted
from Electronic health records [ 23]. This huge amount of data is stored in the data
warehouse and then analysis is done to produce the effective and feasible outcomes.
One of the important features of the healthcare big data is that it is unstructured
and heterogeneous type which again becomes more challenging in terms of proper
management.
In this scenario ML, DL, and NLP works as a boon to this sector which helps
to solve many problems related to database management. Whether it is the dataextraction from various medical images (CT, MRI, X-ray, ECG, EMG, PET, and
EEG) or to manage the medical records; is very easy with use of advanced level
of algorithms [ 24]. But it must accept the challenges for the proper management of
database and accomplish the task of managing the healthcare big data. Some of the
basic challenges are data storage, accuracy, availability, data cleaning, data integrity,
data sharing, and security. With proper data management and data analysis, AI helpsto manage the analytics of the huge data and provides better access to patients and
doctors.
4.2 Advanced Medical Devices
In medical and healthcare services, AI and its related technology has spelled its
magic in the development of medical devices used for treatment. Talking about thedevices, it is only the machinery and equipment that come into our mind which mostly
includes surgical equipment, image capturing, and analyzing devices. But to a large
extent, software is the most essential medium used in the device to analyze, inter-pret, and solve health-related problems in diagnosis and treatment of diseases. The
classiﬁcation of medical devices is primarily based on three basic categories (Fig. 6)
and all the recent developments are classiﬁed based on these major classiﬁcations.
In 2016, Medtronic a leading medical device company, in collaboration with IBM
Watson developed the SugarIQ App including the AI technology. This app helps the
diabetic patient to monitor the sugar levels along with the proper guidance for food
habits and all the information regarding healthy eating habits. In 2017, the Medtronic
again introduced a device asserting automatic insulin control and stabilization in thebody throughout the day. The device named as MiniMed 670G system was launched
with the approval of Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In 2017, computerized

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 41
Fig. 6 Image depicting three
main categories of medical
devices development
CT scans was introduced by the GE health care in collaboration with NVIDIA. It
enhanced the medical imaging process and ensures the capture of minute details of
affected body parts which is not possible to get by physically looking at the scan
data.
The invention of IoT and AI has given many devices in form of various mobile
apps to monitor the body required to maintain good health. Patient monitoring systemis also a device or system for monitoring the patients’ detailed activity and helps tocontrol the deterioration of the body by giving feedback and suggestions. One such
development is IntelliVue Guardian Solution, which was done by Philips Healthcares
which uses the concept of artiﬁcial intelligent and makes appropriate predictions foreffective and early managing of health status of a patient.
4.3 Drug Design
Artiﬁcial intelligence has already marked its signiﬁcance in drug discovery and nowdrug design is also becoming a chief application of AI in drug development process.The basic drug development process includes various steps such as the drug target
identiﬁcation and validation, new drugs design, repurposing of drugs, improvement
in research and development, asserting biomedicine conformation, and ﬁnally theclinical trials on patients [ 25]. AI has also successfully helped in the drug discovery
method by determining the correct drug molecule and the information about thereaction of proteins in the body before going for design. For drug design, AI is usedto determine the proper candidate molecules from the reduced graph of the drug

42 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
to be designed. This type of job was performed by the company Tessella. AI can
also help in differentiating the non-suitable compounds for the drug design which
are not suitable for the patient body. It also takes the help of computer-aided designtechniques to design the drugs for speciﬁc requirements [ 26].
4.4 Digital Consultation
AI provides digital consultation to the whole world in the form of healthcare chatbots.
These are AI-based software solution which provides customized service in form of
messages to the patients or the users without making them realize that they aretalking to any person or any device [ 27]. These basically make use of the natural
language processing methods and help the healthcare industry to provide digitizedservice. They also provide consultation regarding food habits, exercise, and othertips to stay healthy. It helps to take necessary preventive measures by the users in
order to protect themselves from getting affected with any disease and keep track of
their health. Many services companies like Sensely, Y our.MD, Babylon HealthTap+
, Pact., Woebot, and others provide a platform for digital consultation to the patients
with the help of AI and related technologies like ML, NLP , and DL.
4.5 Genome Editing
This is totally a different aspect of AI application in which the focus is on thefeatures of genetic composition of a person. They try to get the relationship between
the occurrence of the disease and the changes it made to the genes. Using the AI and
ML techniques, scientists are now able to know the genomic data using gene editingand sequencing techniques. Gene editing can be described as the technique involved
in DNA mutations with some alterations in the target sequence such as insertion,
deletion, and substitutions [ 28]. It is known that the gene sequence consists of base
pairs made up of (A, T, C, G); general DNA sequencing took much time but after the
invent of a technology called as high throughput sequencing (HTS) which helps to
perform the DNA sequencing in less than a day. The alterations done in that sequenceis termed as gene editing. Many AI platforms have been developed to enhance the
HTS for a better representation of genome such as DeepV ariant. Overall, AI has
efﬁciently aided the healthcare system and expected to do more in near future related
to genome editing and more advancements including the genetic screening tools for
the infants.

Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 43
5 Conclusion
Artiﬁcial intelligence and its related technology like machine learning, deep learning,
natural language processing has invaded the world undergoing fourth phase of indus-trial revolution in a very strong manner. It has put its incredible and efﬁcient impacts
on almost every sector, from agriculture to education and even to the space tech-
nology. It has greatly assisted the healthcare system for making it more efﬁcientin providing the services to the patients and being affordable and feasible for use.
The use of machine learning in health care has really modiﬁed the scenario in the
healthcare system and still there is more scope for research and development. Thevarious application of deep learning and machine learning has helped in better disease
detection and diagnosis process. Furthermore, the use of deep learning in image anal-
ysis and data extraction from medical images has helped in detecting some deadly
diseases. It has also its impact in radiology and the use of robots in medical diagnosis
process has its own signiﬁcance. Artiﬁcial intelligence has also spread its spectrumto advance level of medical application and many more research results are leading
to a new venture of application in health sciences. It has greatly changed the daily
activities by digitalizing the universe and getting beneﬁts from the predictive anal-ysis. The common advantages of AI include reducing the workload of humans and
making it easier for them to get much lesser error-prone results for any given set of
problems. But considering the assumption of AI creating new employment opportu-nities it also predicts the risk of increase in unemployment. Furthermore, the cost of
implementation and the complexity of the used algorithms if can be reduced will be
of much use in health care systems. In conclusion, it can be said that AI is the newway of living with and making it the assistance of human.
References
1. Spector, L.: Evolution of artiﬁcial intelligence. Artif. Intell. 170(18), 1251–1253 (2006)
2. Kamble, R., Shah, D.: Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in human life. Int. J. Res. 6(6),
178–188 (2018)
3. Singh, H.: Artiﬁcial intelligence revolution and India’s AI development: challenges and scope.
Int. J. Sci. Res. 3(3), 417–421 (2017)
4. Simeone, O.: A brief introduction to machine learning for engineers. Found. Trends Signal
Process. 12(3–4), 200–431 (2018)
5. Wang, X., Lin, X., Dang, X.: Supervised learning in spiking neural networks: a review of
algorithms and evaluations. Neural Netw. 125, 258–280 (2020)
6. Jiang, F., Jiang, Y ., Zhi, H., Dong, Y ., Li, Hao:, Ma, Sufeng: , Wang, Y ongjun:, Dong, Q.,
Shen, H., Wang ,Y.: Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare: Past, present and future. Stroke V asc.
Neurol .2( 4), 230 - 243 (2017).
7. Simeone, O.: A very brief introduction to machine learning with applications to communication
systems. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw. 4(4), 648–664 (2018)
8. Herzog, S., Tetzlaff, C., Wörgötter, F.: Evolving artiﬁcial neural networks with feedback. Neural
Netw. 123, 153–162 (2020)
9. Reggia, J.A.: Neural computation in medicine. Artif. Intell. Med. 5(2), 143–157 (1993)
44 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
10. Lobo, J.L., Del Ser, J., Bifet, A., Kasabov, N.: Spiking Neural Networks and online learning:
an overview and perspectives. Neural Netw. 121, 88–100 (2020)
11. Schmidhuber, J.: Deep Learning in neural networks: an overview. Neural Netw. 61, 85–117
(2015)
12. Kiryu, S., Akai, H., Yasaka, K.: Deep learning application in the oesophageal endoscopy. J.
Med. Artif. Intell. 2, 22–22 (2019)
13. Yamashita, R., Nishio, M., Do, R.K.G., Togashi, K.: Convolutional neural networks: an
overview and application in radiology. Insights Imaging 9(4), 611–629 (2018)
14. Tian, C., Xu, Y ., Zuo, W.: Image denoising using deep CNN with batch renormalization. Neural
Netw. 121, 461–473 (2020)
15. Barbedo, J.G.A: Detecting and Classifying Pests in Crops Using Proximal Images and Machine
Learning: A Review. Artif.Intell. 1(2), 312 - 328 (2020).
16. Talaviya, T., Shah, D., Patel, N., Yagnik, H., Shah, M.: Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agricul-
ture Implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture for optimisation of irrigation and
application of pesticides and herbicides. Artif. Intell. Agric. 4, 58–73 (2020)
17. Hernández-Blanco, A., Herrera-Flores, B., Tomás, D., Navarro-Colorado, B.: A Systematic
Review of Deep Learning Approaches to Educational Data Mining. Complexity, 2019, (2019).
18. Dickmanns, E.D.: V ehicles capable of dynamic vision. IJCAI Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. 2,
1577–1592 (1997)
19. Hamet, P ., Tremblay, J.: Artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine. Metabolism 69, S36–S40 (2017)
20. Mani Sekhar, S.R., Siddesh, G.M., Tiwari, A., Anand, A.: Bioinspired Techniques for Data
Security in IoT. In: Alam M., Shakil K., K. S. (eds) Internet of Things (IoT):Concept andApplications(2020). pp. 167 - 187, Springer, Cham (2020).
21. Xu, Q., Wang, L., Sansgiry, S.S.: A systematic literature review of predicting diabetic
retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes using machinelearning. J. Med. Artif. Intell. 3, 1–13 (2020)
22. Riihimaa, P .: Impact of machine learning and feature selection on type 2 diabetes risk prediction.
J. Med. Artif. Intell. 3, 1–6 (2020)
23. Shah, F., Kendall, P ., Khozin, N., Goosen, S., Hu, R., Laramie, J., Ringel, J., Schork, M.:
Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning in clinical development: a translational perspective.npj Digit. Med. 2, 69 (2019)
24. Abbod, M.F., Linkens, D.A., Mahfouf, M., Dounias, G.: Survey on the use of smart and adaptive
engineering systems in medicine. Artif. Intell. Med. 26(3), 179–209 (2002)
25. Mak, K.K., Pichika, M.R.: Artiﬁcial intelligence in drug development: present status and future
prospects. Drug Discov. Today. 24(3), 773–780 (2019)
26. Tang, C., Ji, J., Tang, Y ., Gao, S., Tang, Z., Todo, Y .: A novel machine learning technique for
computer-aided diagnosis. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 92(February), 103627 (2020)
27. Colace, F., De Santo, M., Lombardi, M., Pascale, F., Pietrosanto, A., Lemma, S.: Chatbot for
e-learning: a case of study. Int. J. Mech. Eng. Robot. Res. 7(5), 528–533 (2018)
28. Manghwar, H., Lindsey, K., Zhang, X., Jin, S.: CRISPR/Cas system: recent advances and future
prospects for genome editing. Trends Plant Sci. 24(12), 1102–1125 (2019)
View publication stats