 to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 33
moving forward in the pest/weed control methods and lastly to the crop harvesting
and supply of produce to the right place and at justiﬁable rate [ 15,16]. With the
advent of AI, sensor technology and Internet this industry has beneﬁtted to a large
extent. In soil analysis and monitoring, AI can help us to know about the soil and seed
relationship. In this regard, it tells which seed should be opted for speciﬁc type of
soil. It predicts in reducing the use of harmful chemical fertilizers used to enhance theplant growth and monitors the irrigation method thereby saving water. According to
a study done in Alfalfa, California, the use of Geographic Information System (GIS),
in the irrigation method has helped to enhance the crop output by 35% and reductionin the amount of water used for irrigation. AI-based apps, basically with the help of
sensors, pictures, and infrared rays help to determine the quality and properties of
soil. Hence it helps in improving the agriculture process assuring better yield andproﬁt for the concerned farmers.
Moving to the next application is the sowing process enhancement by the use of
AI sowing app. According to a study in 2016, pilot project with 175 farmers wasinitiated by ICRISA T (The International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid
Tropics) with partnership of Microsoft in Kurnool district of Andhra Pradesh, India
whose objective was to increase the level of output (about 30%) with decrease in
the investment done prior to the farming. It was equipped with the alert messages
provided to the farmers regarding the most suitable dates for cropping, land prepara-tion, and usage of fertilizer using this app which works and gives required results by
taking the images uploaded by the farmers from the user end. In another study, the
development of machine learning technology along with integrated computer visionapplications by Blue River Technologies aimed to optimize the herbicide and pest
control. This technology helps to distinguish between the affected and normal parts
of the plant. The “see and spray” project of Arkansas, USA, using this technology,got reduction in the required amount of expenses for weedicides per acre of land.
In a different study done on the crop harvesting, it was found that the time taken by
AI-based robots in tomato farms in Japan, is lesser than the time taken by the human.
3.2 Business, Banking, and Finance
This industry or sector is very important and delicate to protect the data and recordsof millions of customers. The prime factor is the trust, data transparency, and security
of the customers. But unfortunately, till date, AI is unable to stop any fraud cases.
However, with the help of AI many fraud detection methods and technologies are now
offered to make the system more robust. Similarly, the business and retail market are
also getting beneﬁted by improvised methods of customer handling and providingfaster and safer services. The world of e-commerce is highly affected by its high-level
of customer interaction.
In the ﬁnance and banking sector, AI has come up with many technological aids
either in form of apps or methods to prevent from frauds, enhance better customer datastorage/retrieval, and many more. A study by a bank helped online fraud detection
