 to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 31
the system, learn from the data and produce results. Some of the major appli-
cations of the RNN are the Chatbots, fraud detection algorithms in monetary
transaction, providing caption for images, and many more [ 11].
(c) Convolutional neural networks : the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
are the most widely used neural networks which have multi-layered neuralnetwork. The CNN is considered to be the most efﬁcient form of neural networkwhich is basically used for feature extraction of images and pattern recognition.
It has a wide range of application in the ﬁeld of medical diagnosis and has
helped in medical image analysis. Deep CNN has its great usage in radiologyand pathology as well. For instance, it can help in esophageal endoscopy for
detecting esophageal cancer [ 12]. The schematic diagram (Fig. 4) describes
how the image recognized by the network [ 13,14]. The CNN network is widely
used method and algorithm in the application of deep learning and is basicallyused for image identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. The algorithms are developed
in a manner to deal with the pixel data. The basic CNN network consists oftwo parts, i.e., feature extractor and classiﬁer. The feature extractor contains the
convolutional and pooling layers whose purpose is to extract the minute features
from the image in terms of pixel data. The convolutional layer deals with the
feature extraction of the image and preserving the relevant data about the
pixels. It reveals the information like edge, boundaries of a image. The poolinglayers reduce the dimensionality of an image while retaining the important
information. As CNN is a multilayer neuron network, the role classiﬁer part
of the network is to classify the information obtained from convolution andpooling layers. This role is played by the fully connective layer whose motive
is to connect each node of a layer with other nodes. As a result, whatever image
Fig. 4 Schematic diagram depicting the image recognition of the input image using CNN
