 to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 25
W eak or narrow AI : it is a type of AI which can perform a predeﬁned narrow set of
instructions without exhibiting any thinking capability. It is the most widely used type
of AI in this world. Some famous examples are Apples’s Siri, Alexa, Alpha Go, IBM’sWatson supercomputer, Sophia (the humanoid) all belong to the weak AI type [ 3].
General AI : it is the type of AI which can perform the tasks like what human can
do. Till now it is not achieved, there are no such machines which works like humanor can think as perfectly as human, but it may happen in near future.
Strong AI : it is the type of AI in which it is expected that the machine will surpass
the capacity of human. It will perform better than humans, though it is tough, but it
is not impossible. It may be the situation when it can be said that the machines will
be the master and overtake humans. It has been considered as a great threat to thesociety by scientists including Stephen Hawking.
1.2 Types of AI (Based on Functionality)
Based on the functionality, artiﬁcial intelligence can be classiﬁed as per the followingtypes:
(i) Reactive machines
(ii) Limited memory
(iii) Theory of mind
(iv) Self-awareness.
Reactive machines : these are the machines which works on the data available in the
form of predeﬁned dataset. It does not have the facility of data storage for storing
the past and future data. It completely depends on the present data. IBM’s chess
program which defeated famous champion Garry Kasparov and the deep blue system,
Google’s AlphaGo are some of the examples for reactive machines [ 3].
Limited memory : these are the machines which can store the past experience or
store the memory for limited period of time. An example for limited memory AI isthe self-driving cars (it can store the information like speed, distance, speed limit
required for the navigation of the car).
Theory of mind : these are types of machines, which are expected to understand the
psychological and emotional aspects of human mind and work accordingly. So far
such machines are a dream but scientists are working to develop such machines in
near future.
Self-awareness : these machines belong to a hypothetical concept that will be consid-
ered as super-intelligent machines, which can think, act, and will be self-aware as
they will have consciousness and sentiments like humans. Research is carried out todevelop such machines and considered as future AI.
