 to Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Moumita Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
Abstract Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is the branch of computer science, which makes
the computers to mimic the human behavior to assist humans for better perfor-
mance in the ﬁeld of science and technology. Replicating human intelligence, solving
knowledge-intensive tasks, building machines, which can perform tasks, that require
human intelligence, creating some system which can learn by itself are the few
speciﬁc goals of AI. Machine learning and deep learning are two subsets of AI which
are used to solve problems using high performance algorithms and multilayer neuralnetworks, respectively. With the help of machine learning process, structured data
like genetic data, electrophysical data, and imaging data are properly investigated
in medical diagnosis. AI provides advanced devices, advanced drug designing tech-niques, tele-treatment, physician–patient communication using Chatbots and intel-
ligent machines used for analyzing the cause and the chances of occurrence of any
disease in the ﬁeld of health care.
Keywords Artiﬁcial intelligence
·Machine learning ·Deep learning ·Drug
development ·Healthcare systems
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is a domain of computer science which deals with the
development of intelligent computer systems, which are capable to perceive, analyze,
and react accordingly to the inputs [ 1,2]. It is well-known fact that humans are consid-
ered as the most intelligent and smart species on earth. The features which have helped
them to bag this title include the ability to think, apply logic, do reasoning, under-
stand the complexity, and make decisions on their own. They can also do planning,innovation, and solve problems to a greater extent. Since the era of invention of ﬁre to
reaching the Mars, man has invented many things for the beneﬁt of humans. One such
M. Ghosh ·A. Thirugnanam ( B)
Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering, National Institute of Technology
Rourkela, Rourkela 769008, Odisha, Indiae-mail: thirugnanam.a@nitrkl.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021K. G. Srinivasa et al. (eds.), Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Information
Management: A Healthcare Perspective , Studies in Big Data 88,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0415-7_223
