 to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 37
3.7 Space Exploration
In the present scenario it has become almost impossible to imagine the world without
technology and the effects of AI in space exploration. The world is aware of the spacemission of Chandrayan-2 and the mission to Mars of ISRO which is not possible
without the help of AI and its application. Starting from the satellite communication
to the rovers moving around the Mars surface many activities needs to be performedby its own or without any instruction from the space station. Be it NASA or ISRO
or any other space organization, no one can deny the use of AI in space exploration
and how it has enhanced the quality of space exploration. The satellites sending theimages from space are decoded and extraction of useful information from the images
is done with the help of machine and deep learning. As per a study in 2015, it has been
known that the space mission of SpaceX Falcon 9 was accomplished with the help
of machine learning which helped it for successful landing at the Cape Canaveral
Air Force Station. Application of deep learning has assured the automatic landing ofmany aircrafts, accurate data collection and transmission without minimum chances
of human error.
From another study it was reported that SKICA T (Sky Image Cataloging and
Analysis Tool) performed beyond the expectations of human and was able to classifymany images having lower resolution during the span of second Palomer Sky Survey.
With the help of AI, NASA and Google discovered two obscure planets in 2017[Kepler-90i and Kepler-90 g]. From these studies, it can be assumed how strongly
AI and its subset-based technologies have changed the world in the space exploration
and deﬁnitely, many more to come with the strengths of AI technology in creating aworld of intelligent machines.
4 Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Advanced Medical Diagnosis
Medical ﬁeld is the area where the AI has put its most important impact which haschanged the way of medical diagnosis. It has made the diagnosis process much moreeffective, efﬁcient, faster, and much more reliable. It never aims to replace the doctors
but to help them in making their service easier. It basically acts as an assistant to
the physician. The role of AI in medical diagnosis is classiﬁed into two types, i.e.,virtual and physical. Virtual branch deals with clinical data management and the
physical branch mostly deals with the use of robots [ 19]. It has many applications
such as assisting in diagnosis, in surgery, with the help of speciﬁcally designed robots
and equipment helping in guiding the patients about the particular disease. It also
helps to aware them and restricts them from getting affected with the help of Tele-
treatment technologies. It is also used in signal and image processing along withsome crucial predictions regarding the organs. It has also assisted the physicians
in maintaining their daily schedule by acting as a reminder to them. It also helps
the patients in keeping track with the doctor regarding their pre- and post-surgery
