42 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
to be designed. This type of job was performed by the company Tessella. AI can
also help in differentiating the non-suitable compounds for the drug design which
are not suitable for the patient body. It also takes the help of computer-aided designtechniques to design the drugs for speciﬁc requirements [ 26].
4.4 Digital Consultation
AI provides digital consultation to the whole world in the form of healthcare chatbots.
These are AI-based software solution which provides customized service in form of
messages to the patients or the users without making them realize that they aretalking to any person or any device [ 27]. These basically make use of the natural
language processing methods and help the healthcare industry to provide digitizedservice. They also provide consultation regarding food habits, exercise, and othertips to stay healthy. It helps to take necessary preventive measures by the users in
order to protect themselves from getting affected with any disease and keep track of
their health. Many services companies like Sensely, Y our.MD, Babylon HealthTap+
, Pact., Woebot, and others provide a platform for digital consultation to the patients
with the help of AI and related technologies like ML, NLP , and DL.
4.5 Genome Editing
This is totally a different aspect of AI application in which the focus is on thefeatures of genetic composition of a person. They try to get the relationship between
the occurrence of the disease and the changes it made to the genes. Using the AI and
ML techniques, scientists are now able to know the genomic data using gene editingand sequencing techniques. Gene editing can be described as the technique involved
in DNA mutations with some alterations in the target sequence such as insertion,
deletion, and substitutions [ 28]. It is known that the gene sequence consists of base
pairs made up of (A, T, C, G); general DNA sequencing took much time but after the
invent of a technology called as high throughput sequencing (HTS) which helps to
perform the DNA sequencing in less than a day. The alterations done in that sequenceis termed as gene editing. Many AI platforms have been developed to enhance the
HTS for a better representation of genome such as DeepV ariant. Overall, AI has
efﬁciently aided the healthcare system and expected to do more in near future related
to genome editing and more advancements including the genetic screening tools for
the infants.
