34 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
solution provider, i.e., Teradata which helps to manage the false positive cases and
detection of real frauds. Another study revealed that the payment fraud over anomaly
of data is nicely dealt by a client bank using the software Feedzai, using which thebank got a hike of 78% of new customers. DataVisor software helped a bank in USA
to detect the fraud in loan and repayments and get proﬁt by 30% with a high accuracy
of 90%. Similarly, in business sector, AI has helped many IT ﬁrms like Deloitte, IBM,Infosys to bloom in the market as a better technological service provider. Elsevier
undergone a digital transformation from being a publisher to a tech with the help of
big data and machine learning.
3.3 Education
This is the sector of any nation which transforms the nation after all students are thefuture of the nation. Considering India only where it is assumed that almost more
than half of the population is of age lesser than 25, therefore, it is much more crucial
to protect the data shared by the students and provide the best form of education. In
this pandemic year, it is not unknown how technology has equipped the education
sector to continue the process of education be it in schools, colleges, or research.Apps like Zoom, Microsoft Teams have made it possible or easy to impart knowledge
online and from distance. AI has helped the students worldwide to get access to the
huge amount of data in the forms of syllabus, curriculum, textbooks, research articlesand papers, and e-learning to a greater extent [ 17].
According to Content Technologies Inc., which is an AI research and development
company, smart, and customized educational content can be created and developedwhich help the students to get access of the customized study materials. It basically
uses the concept of deep learning. In a hackathon (organized by NITI Ayog), ReadEx
was featured which helped to generate real-time questions using natural languageprocessing and also provided content recommendations and ﬂashcard creation. In
a recent study, the Andhra Pradesh government (India) was aided by a predictive
analysis done with the assistance of Microsoft using some Azure machine learningprocess to ﬁnd the dropouts of students in an academic institution. It successfully
detected 19,500 students record who are more likely to dropout in Visakhapatnam
district for the year (2018–2019) so that precautionary counseling sessions could bearranged to counsel the students. Not only the students, teachers also got beneﬁtted
from these technologies as it optimized searches in Wikipedia or e-learning courses
from various organizations. A case study depicts the use of Pearson’s Write-To-Learn
app for the betterment of writing skills. This app provides tips, hints, and personalized
feedbacks to improve the writing skills of the learner be it student or any teacher. Inanother study, AI has put the fact of how Wikipedia handled the situation of decreased
level of content writers by 40% and the problem of controlling abusive comments
by the users. It uses AI and associate technology to deal with it and now its AI whowrites for Wikipedia which has really changed the world.
