24 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
invention is the computer, which plays a signiﬁcant role in reducing the workload of
humans and solving many complex mathematical and logical problems. However,
for researchers, it can be considered that sky is not the limit for new inventions. So,they tried to create a “man-made homosapien” species, which can be related to the
world of computers in the form of AI (which are Artiﬁcial, i.e., manmade, and Intel-
ligence, i.e., has thinking power). If a system can have the basic skills like learning,
reasoning, self-improvement (by learning from experience), language understanding,and solving problems, then it can be assumed that there is the existence of AI. The AI
has been used and implemented in many ﬁelds especially in technological domainand is expected to provide 2.3 million jobs by 2020. It is a cutting-edge technology
which has its impact in almost every ﬁeld, be it business, defense, aerospace, or health
care systems. It can also be denoted as the method of simulation of human intelli-gence designed or programmed by humans. With the help of AI, a well-equipped
life is generated where the automated machines work for humans, saving their time
and energy. Basically, two types of assistants are considered for humans, manual(in the form of robots), and digital (Chatbots) which can perform risky, repetitive,
and troublesome tasks. The task of developing such machines is accomplished by
minutely studying the human behavior and implementing the logic in the form of
algorithms resulting in inventions of software, devices, robots, etc., making human
race smarter.
There are many areas which contribute to artiﬁcial intelligence which includes
mathematics (used for developing algorithms), biology, philosophy, psychology,neuroscience (for studying human mind and its behavior), statistics (for handlinghuge data), and last but not the least, computer science (to run the algorithm for
implementing the concepts). The basic aim of AI is to provide more transparent,
interpretable, and explainable systems which can help to establish a better-equippedsystem used as an intelligent agent. The concept of trusting machine as a replica of
human started with the invent of turing test in which the machine is tested irrespective
of the knowledge of examiner upon the instructions given considering it as humanand if it passes the test, the machine is considered as intelligent. No wonder AI has
affected many aspects of the society and presented a new modern era in this digital
revolution.
1.1 Types of AI (Based on Capabilities)
The various types of artiﬁcial intelligence based on the capabilities can be classiﬁed
as
– Weak or narrow AI
– General AI
– Strong AI.