28 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
more and more data. It can learn from the data and improve automatically. This
is very much helpful for dealing with huge data of complex problems, which are
difﬁcult for humans to deal with and they also consume more time in solving. In thisprocess of computing the machine receives data as input and provides result using
an appropriate algorithm.
Classiﬁcation of Machine Learning
Based on the nature of the learning signal or response that the machine gets; machine
learning can be classiﬁed into following categories:
(i) Supervised learning
(ii) Unsupervised learning
(iii) Reinforcement learning.
Supervised learning : according to the literal meaning, this method correlates with
the method of learning of student under the supervision of a teacher. As a teacher
illustrates the student with many good examples to help in grasping the concept
perfectly, the machine is provided with many labeled data to help in obtaining theperfect output from the given input. The algorithms under this method are classiﬁed
into two categories, i.e., regression and classiﬁcation. One example of this method
is spam ﬁltering [ 5,6].
Unsupervised learning : in this method the machine has to train itself without any
supervisor, i.e., the data provided at the input are not labeled or classiﬁed. Thealgorithm has to train itself by searching the degree of similarities among the given
data and ﬁgure out the appropriate output for the given problem. The algorithm helps
to reﬁne the data which can be correlated with the desired output. The algorithmsare classiﬁed into clustering and association types [ 6,7].
Reinforcement learning : this method is typically a feedback-based learning method.
In this method the machine is given a reward for every right action taken by it and
a penalty for any wrong action, so it is a self-learning method done by analyzing its
past performances. The objective of the algorithm is to achieve maximum rewardpoints. Examples for reinforcement learning is a robotic dog learning by its own
mistakes and performances, computer playing video games by their own.
The machine learning algorithm is widely being used in multiple ﬁelds such as
medical diagnosis, image processing, web search engines, photo tagging applica-tions, ﬁnance and marketing sector, fraud detection, weather forecasting, and many
more. The main advantage is the repetitive process and self-learning methods that itapplies to ﬁnd the output.
