40 M. Ghosh and A. Thirugnanam
data size of this digitized universe will be almost 40,000 Exabytes (EB) by the end
of 2020. Similarly, by the use of AI and relevant technologies in healthcare system, it
is generating large amounts of data in the form of EHR (Electronic Health Record),EMR (Electronic Medical Record), PHR (Personal Health Record), MPM (Medical
Practice Management software), and other digital records related to the patients and
physicians. The biggest challenge is to manage, maintain the privacy and securitynorms of all these data. In such cases, an advanced level of algorithms by AI and ML
are required to handle big data efﬁciently ensuring no loss of security and integrity
of the data. For instance, the AI and ML approaches have been used to ﬁnd usefulinformation from the “data lakes” which are large data sets of information extracted
from Electronic health records [ 23]. This huge amount of data is stored in the data
warehouse and then analysis is done to produce the effective and feasible outcomes.
One of the important features of the healthcare big data is that it is unstructured
and heterogeneous type which again becomes more challenging in terms of proper
management.
In this scenario ML, DL, and NLP works as a boon to this sector which helps
to solve many problems related to database management. Whether it is the dataextraction from various medical images (CT, MRI, X-ray, ECG, EMG, PET, and
EEG) or to manage the medical records; is very easy with use of advanced level
of algorithms [ 24]. But it must accept the challenges for the proper management of
database and accomplish the task of managing the healthcare big data. Some of the
basic challenges are data storage, accuracy, availability, data cleaning, data integrity,
data sharing, and security. With proper data management and data analysis, AI helpsto manage the analytics of the huge data and provides better access to patients and
doctors.
4.2 Advanced Medical Devices
In medical and healthcare services, AI and its related technology has spelled its
magic in the development of medical devices used for treatment. Talking about thedevices, it is only the machinery and equipment that come into our mind which mostly
includes surgical equipment, image capturing, and analyzing devices. But to a large
extent, software is the most essential medium used in the device to analyze, inter-pret, and solve health-related problems in diagnosis and treatment of diseases. The
classiﬁcation of medical devices is primarily based on three basic categories (Fig. 6)
and all the recent developments are classiﬁed based on these major classiﬁcations.
In 2016, Medtronic a leading medical device company, in collaboration with IBM
Watson developed the SugarIQ App including the AI technology. This app helps the
diabetic patient to monitor the sugar levels along with the proper guidance for food
habits and all the information regarding healthy eating habits. In 2017, the Medtronic
again introduced a device asserting automatic insulin control and stabilization in thebody throughout the day. The device named as MiniMed 670G system was launched
with the approval of Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In 2017, computerized
