Introduction to Artiﬁcial Intelligence 35
3.4 Entertainment and Gaming
This industry does not need much introduction and effect of AI in this. The highly efﬁ-
cient digitally strong technologies have provided awesome movies and work pieceswhich includes high power editing, imaging, and sound effects. It has transformed the
media industry. Starting from the camera effects to the action effects everything has
been improved. Probably the superpowers having a huge fan following are nothingusing technology. The famous Netﬂix uses AI and big data to manage the search
and provides the better content recommendation and many more ways to help users
for better access of data. Gaming industry also uses AI to improve the quality of thegame and secure the data provided by the users. It has made the online game in social
media possible with multiple participants. Ludoking, PUBG, and many other games
have touched and captured the hearts of millions of teenagers.
3.5 Health Care
Artiﬁcial intelligence has its maximum effect in this sector and has totally trans-
formed the way of treatment and diagnosis. The goal of having a very effective
healthcare system of a nation can now be achieved in many way by difﬁcult taskaccomplishments with the help of technology and AI. The three basic steps of treat-
ment which are detection, diagnosis and analysis, and treatment are now improvised
and enhanced with the advent of artiﬁcial intelligence in this sector. The main twofactors which are of major concerned are the patient’s data privacy and security. Any
technology which is introduced mainly focus on these two factors. This includes
development of different apps including data collection apps, digital Chatbots forconsultation on primary basis, image detection, and analysis using speciﬁc algo-
rithms. Since the broad discussion has been done later in this chapter here the focus
is on the role of AI in COVID-19 pandemic in India and worldwide.
Role of AI in Handling COVID-19 Pandemic
The role of AI in medical ﬁeld is tremendous as the planet witnessed a pandemic
due to Corona outbreak, which has affected the entire human population with huge
number of death cases. In this scenario, AI has come with its technologies to helpthe people from getting infected with the virus. It cannot assure to avoid death but
can assure prevention and precaution by the following ways:
(i) It has served as high-level data mining tool : with the help of AI, researchers
can get help to ﬁght the disease. Information like the nature of the virus,
the symptoms, crucial data from other research papers, and records of pastincidents are available by data mining methodologies.
(ii) As a predictor : the Corona outbreak was reported in Wuhan, China. The fact
that it turned into a pandemic and all such related information were predicted